de https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Suger

He urged the king to destroy the feudal bandits, was responsible for
the royal tactics in dealing with the communal movements, and
endeavoured to regularize the administration of justice. He left his
abbey, which possessed considerable property, enriched and embellished
by the construction of a new church built in the nascent Gothic
style. Suger wrote extensively on the construction of the abbey in
Liber de Rebus in Administratione sua Gestis, Libellus Alter de
Consecratione Ecclesiae Sancti Dionysii, and Ordinatio. In the 1940s,
the prominent art-historian Erwin Panofsky claimed that the theology
of Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite influenced the architectural style
of the abbey of St. Denis, though later scholars have argued against
such a simplistic link between philosophy and architectural form.[1]
Similarly the assumption by 19th century French authors that Suger was
the "designer" of St Denis (and hence the "inventor" of Gothic
architecture) has been almost entirely discounted by more recent
scholars. Instead he is generally seen as having been a bold and
imaginative patron who encouraged the work of an innovative (but now
unknown) master mason.[2][3]

A chalice once owned by Suger is now in the collections of the
National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C.


de https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Suger_de_Saint-Denis


Il en devient l'abbé de 1122 à 1151. Esprit pondéré, répugnant aux
excès d'ascétisme, il s'oppose à Bernard de Clairvaux. On sait par une
lettre LXVIII de Bernard de Clairvaux (1090-1153) à Suger (1081-1151)
qu'une réforme de l'abbaye a eu lieu en 1127. Le goût des ornements
dont Suger veut doter son église s'oppose à l'exigence de
dépouillement, le refus de tout ornement et de tout luxe ou de sujets
figuratifs détournant les moines de la prière que prône saint Bernard
dans ses écrits et dans l' Exordium Magnum Ordinis
Cisterciensis. Bernard de Clairvaux écrit dans l' Apologie à Guillaume
de Saint-Thierry :

« L'Église resplendit dans ses murs et elle n'a rien pour ses
pauvres. Elle revêt d'or ses pierres et abandonne ses fils tout
nus. Aux dépens des miséreux, on régale les yeux des riches. Les
curieux trouvent de quoi s'amuser, mais pas les malheureux pour se
sustenter ».  « Mais que font dans les cloîtres, devant les frères en
train de lire, ces grotesques qui prêtent à rire, ces beautés d'une
étonnante monstruosité ou ces monstres d'une étonnante beauté ? » et
dans sa critique de l'ordre de Cluny :

« Il m'est arrivé de voir, c'est la pure vérité, un abbé se faisant
accompagner de soixante chevaux et plus. Lorsqu'on voit passer cette
sorte d'abbé, on dirait non pas des gardiens paternels de monastère,
mais des seigneurs châtelains, non des hommes ayant charge d'âme, mais
des princes gouvernant des provinces ».  Suger répond à cet appel à la
simplicité dans le livre De la consécration :

« Que chacun suive sa propre opinion. Pour moi, je le déclare, ce qui
m'a paru juste avant tout, c'est que tout ce qu'il y a de plus
précieux doit servir d'abord à la célébration de la sainte
eucharistie. Si, selon la parole de Dieu, selon l'ordonnance des
prophètes, les coupes d'or, les fioles d'or, les petits mortiers d'or
devaient servir à recueillir le sang des boucs, des veaux et d'une
génisse rouge, combien d'avantage, pour recevoir le sang de
Jésus-Christ, convient-il de disposer les vases d'or, les pierres
précieuses, et tout ce que l'on tient pour précieux dans la
création. Ceux qui nous critiquent objectent qu'il suffit, pour cette
célébration, d'une âme sainte, d'un esprit pur, d'une intention de
foi. Je l'admets : c'est bien cela qui importe avant tout. Mais
j'affirme aussi que l'on doit servir par les ornements extérieurs des
vases sacrés, et plus qu'en toute autre chose dans le saint sacrifice,
en toute pureté intérieure, en toute noblesse extérieure ».  Dès sa
nomination comme abbé, Suger va entreprendre de faire respecter les
droits de l'abbaye, puis commencer à rassembler les fonds nécessaires
pour la reconstruction de l'abbatiale. On ne sait pas en quoi a
consisté cette réforme. On peut citer le jugement d'Abélard, sur
l'abbé Adam, prédécesseur de Suger :

« Un homme dont les habitudes étaient d'autant plus corrompues et
l'infamie d'autant plus notoire que sa dignité de prélat en faisait le
supérieur de tous les autres ».  Suger parle de fissures qui s'ouvrent
dans les murs, de tours qui menacent de s'effondrer, de vases d'autel
perdus, de possessions de l'abbaye laissées en friche...

Dans sa lettre, saint Bernard félicite Suger pour sa réforme après
avoir critiqué les relations particulières entre l'abbaye et la
monarchie en se faisant l'écho d'Abélard :

Ce lieu avait été ennobli et porté à la dignité royale dès les temps
très anciens. Il abritait d'ordinaire les jugements de la cour et les
armées du roi ; on y rendait à César ce qui lui appartenait, mais on
n'y mettait pas la même loyauté à rendre à Dieu ce qui est à Dieu
... Le cloître même du monastère était souvent rempli de soldats,
bruissant de mille affaires, retentissant de querelles, et s'ouvrait
parfois aux femmes16,17 C'est à vos erreurs, non à celles de vos
moines que le zèle des saintes personnes adressait ses critiques. Ce
sont vos erreurs et non les leurs qui les ont suscitées. C'est contre
vous seul et non contre l'abbaye que se sont élevés les murmures de
vos frères : vous seul enfin étiez l'objet de leurs accusations. Que
vous amendiez vos mœurs et il ne resterait rien qui donnât prise à la
calomnie. Que vous changiez enfin, et tout le tumulte cesserait
bientôt, toutes les clameurs se tairaient. La seule et unique raison
qui nous inspirait, c'est que, si vous aviez continué, votre pompe et
votre faste auraient paru un peu trop insolents... Finalement vous
avez donné satisfaction à vos critiques, et vous avez même ajouté ce
qui vous vaut notre juste éloge. Car n’y a-t-il rien qui, dans les
affaires humaines, paraîtra mériter l'éloge si l'on ne juge pas cela
digne de la louange et de l'admiration les plus hautes - encore qu'il
s'agisse en vérité d'une œuvre divine et non humaine -, à savoir un
changement simultané et si soudain de tant de personnes ? Grande est
au ciel la joie que suscite la conversion d'un seul pécheur : que
sera-t-elle devant la conversion de toute une congrégation ?  mais il
continue en critiquant l'entourge du roi Louis VI, et en particulier
du rôle particulier d'Étienne de Garlande qui était un ami, et
peut-être un parent, de Suger et qui avait le tort à ses yeux d'être
sénéchal du roi et clerc. La conjonction de la volonté du roi d'avoir
le contrôle de ses affaires et la condamnation de saint Bernard va
amener en 1128 la disgrâce d'Étienne de Garlande qui était un ami de
Suger. Cette disgrâce va permettre à saint Bernard d'entrer en
relation directe avec le roi le 10 mai 1128. Cet accord entre Suger et
saint Bernard, le conseiller du roi de France et celui du pape, le
riche abbé et le pauvre abbé, va durer jusqu'à la mort de Suger18.

de 
 
~6~ 
Once again, it is Bernard’s letters which shed some light upon his relationship with Sug
er. In his
final letter of 1151, written whilst Suger lay on his deathbed, Bernard says that he his “torn by a desire to seeyou, that I may receive a dying man’s blessing”,
41
 
and that “to my sorrow I lose your dear presence”.
42
Theconventional self-deprecating terms of address aside, we need not doubt that Bernard is here unreservedlysi
ncere. Panofsky claimed that subsequently Bernard “never revised his optimistic interpretation”
43
of
Suger’s reforms, “no matter what they amounted to in reality”.
44
Further to this, Panofsky significantly
interpreted Suger’s own writings as demonstrating the “blissful enthusiasm with which Suger must haveabsorbed … Neo
-
Platonic doctrines”
45
from pseudo-
Dionysius to vindicate his “partiality to images and his
insatia
 ble passion for everything lustrously beautiful”.
46
Such an interpretation stands the reading that this is
a covert response to the criticisms raised by Bernard’s
 Apologia
 , but if so it is a weakly presented argument.Hanning argues that as an author, Sug
er’s “prose … seems resistant to analogous innovations and literaryexpression”
47
found in contemporaneous writing, and that the logic of his texts is held together by the
accumulation of narrative details, rather than “an intellectual construct”.
48
In addition to these claims,
Kidson points out that Suger’s work were “intended solely for domestic consumption”
49
at Saint-Denis, and
largely concerned themselves with matters “of no considerable interest to anyone outside the abbey”.
50
 
Suger’s works were therefor
e a forum for explanation within his own community, but hardly for thecirculation of a new philosophical basis for aesthetic display. As to his intellectual powers, G. Zinn argues
that “Suger was neither a theologian nor a systematic thinker”,
51
and that, remarkably for an abbot of the
period, “left no theological writings”
52
through which an expostulation upon his work at Saint-Denis could
 be expressed. His own education was based on “rhetoric rather than philosophy, scripture rather thantheology”.
53
Suger may therefore have either deliberately not written his accounts as forms of
apologiæ
for hisundertakings due to a lack of mental faculty, or indeed to avoid any potential conflict with Bernard.
41
 
Letters
: 480.
42
 
Letters
: 480.
43
Panofsky, 1979: 11.
44
Panofsky, 1979: 11.
45
Panofsky, 1979: 24.
46
Panofsky, 1979: 25.
47
Hanning, 1986: 145.
48
Hanning, 1986: 145.
49
Kidson, 1987: 9.
50
Kidson 1987: 9.
51
 
G. Zinn. ‘Suger, Theology and the Pseudo
-
Dionysian Tradition’, in Paula Gerson (ed.).
 Abbot Suger and Saint-Denis: A Symposium
(NewYork, 1986), 33-40; 33.
52
Zinn, 1986: 33.
53
Grant, 1998: 84.

 
~7~ 
This questioning of Suger’s erudition throws into grave
 
doubt Panofsky’s assertion that the writings
of pseudo-Dionysius served Suger as the philosophical catalyst for his commissions, and that it lay at the coreof the iconographic programmes at Saint-Denis. One key examples highlighted by Panofsky as a
“condensed statement of the whole theory of “anagogical” illumination”
54
is the pair of inscribed gilt-bronze
doors beneath Suger’s west façade. Their inscription “opens with an admonition to marvel not at the goldand expense, but the labour of the work”,
55
an
d that “the dull mind rises to truth through that which ismaterial, and seeing this light, is resurrected from its former submersion”.
56
 
Despite Kidson’s claim that this“can just as easily be read as conventional piety with no overtones”,
57
a Neo-Platonic drive is irrefutablypresent, and clarifies how the iconography of the doors themselves is to be understood. In representing thecrucifixion, resurrection and ascension of Christ, the metaphors of light are not instantly obvious; thetransfiguration and conversion of Saul would be more explicit Scriptural references. Zinn explains the
Emmaus scene, which includes a supplicant Suger, as an archetype of “seeing physically but not discerning… in a spiritual way”.
58
For an author who was able to do little more than quote Scripture when his own
words ran in parallel, and who “never actually mentioned by name”
59
pseudo-Dionysius, the iconographicalprogramme of the western doors displays an astonishingly recondite assemblage of interlinked episodes.Significan
tly, Suger does not actually claim authorship either the inscription or the doors’ iconographicsequence. In accounting for this, it has been stated that he was “fundamentally influenced by Hugh [of St
-Victor]
”,
60
who established within his nearby monaster
y a “distinctive tradition of exegesis, theology andcontemplation”.
61
Of primary importance here, it was Hugh of St-Victor who wrote a commentary upon
DeCælesti Hierarchia
. Did Suger turn to this distinguished theologian for advice upon the iconography of Saint-Denis, thereby attempting to impress not only the dull minds through material display but also theluminaries of the nearby University of Paris with a sophisticated display of Scriptural metaphors?Perhaps Hugh was responsible, rather than Suger for the anagogical scenes portrayed in Saint-
Denis’s “splendid variety of new windows”,
62
 
which served as “the
raison d’être
 
of the whole design”
.
63
 
54
Panofsky, 1979: 23.
55
Zinn, 1986: 34.
56
Quoted in Panofsky, 1979: 23.
57
Kidson, 1987: 7.
58
Zinn, 1986: 35.
59
Kidson, 1987: 5.
60
Zinn, 1986: 36.
61
Reference missing.*
62
 
De Administratione
: 73.
63
Kidson, 1987: 10.

 
~8~ 
Suger records them as being “painted by the exquisite hands of many masters”
64
 
and of them “urging us
o
nward from the material to the immaterial”,
65
 
in paraphrase of Hugh’s commentary.
66
Such an affirmation
displays Suger’s understanding of how images were used as aids to devotion; as conduits of prayer upon
what they represent, rather than as objects of devotion themselves. Christian art was therefore absolved fromany potential incitement to idolatry.
67
 
The windows’ subject matter involved highly sophisticated
comparisons of Old and New Testament themes, rather than explicit narrative incidents. Possible evidence
of Hugh’s direct involvement can be traced in the lowest roundel of one window (
Figure 7), where the
subject matter closely mirrors the description of a diagram drawn in Hugh’s treatise
De Arca Noe mystica
.
This showed “Christ holding a disk that
 
covered his whole body … [which] represented the cosmos”.
68
It isnot inconceivable that this lost diagram was shown to the glass painters as a model for them to imitate here,and if so
suggests Hugh’s direct influence and involvement with the iconography
of Saint-
Denis. Panofsky’s
claim that
De Cælesti Hierarchia
directly influenced this programme still stands, but the intellectual applicationof its Neo-
Platonism was arguably controlled by Hugh than Suger; the latter remained “a doer who drew
upon a num
 ber of sources”,
69
and the relevance of this text to Saint-Denis would not have been lost uponeither abbot.
70
 
Suger’s works are invaluable as providing some illumination into how a patron at this period
viewed himself, the works he commissioned and how those works were understood. The art-historicaldisagreements between later scholars should not detract from his seminal achievements, which answer atleast some of the questions asked of them. To what degree Suger is himself responsible for the creation ofGothic, the birth of sophisticated iconography and the use of theological argument to justify art are allrelative degrees potentially present when interpreting his works. Panofsky may have been mistaken onsome points, and the need to establish pivotal leaps forward in the gradual continuum of art andarchitectural history may have caused him to inflate Suger into a Renaissance man transplanted to an earlier
time. Even if mistaken, Panofsky must be given credit for opening debates which allow Suger’s w
orks to be
investigated at the level of depth they merit, thereby ensuring that his achievement shall endure: “
sicut legitur- sit tamen non obscuretur
[as it can be read -
oh, may it not be obscured]”
